This repository contains an R script `run_analysis.R` and a code book `CodeBook.md` describing the data used, its variables, and transformations in the script performed to clean up the data that ultimately produces a tidy data set. For convenience, the tidy data set `tidy_data_of_averages.txt` has been included in this repository. Instructions on how to obtain the tidy data set from the R script are given in the final section below.These files have been included to meet the requirements for the Getting and Cleaning Data Course Project. This project is meant to demonstrate the ability to collect, work with, and clean data with the goal of producing a tidy data set so that it can be used for later analysis.## Data SourceThe data used was collected from the accelerometers from the Samsung Galaxy S and can be obtained from this [zip file](https://d396qusza40orc.cloudfront.net/getdata%2Fprojectfiles%2FUCI%20HAR%20Dataset.zip) or the [UCI HAR Dataset website](http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Human+Activity+Recognition+Using+Smartphones).## R ScriptThe R script  `run_analysis.R` reads the UCI HAR Dataset and performs the following tasks.* Merges the training and the test sets (described in `CodeBook.md`) to create one data set.* Extracts only the measurements on the mean and standard deviation for each measurement.* Uses descriptive activity names to name the activities in the data set.* Appropriately labels the data set with descriptive variable names.* From the extracted data set, creates a second, independent tidy data set with the average of each variable for each activity and each subject called `tidy_data_of_averages.txt`.## "Sourcing" the R script into RAs mentioned above, the tidy data set `tidy_data_of_averages.txt` has been included in this repository for convenience. It can also be obtained by sourcing `run_analysis.R` into R. First download and save `run_analysis.R` in the working directory. Then source the script into R using the following command. R will run the script and create the tidy data set `tidy_data_of_averages.txt` in the working directory.````source("run_analysis.R")````Next, the tidy data set can be read into R using the following command.````td <- read.table("tidy_data_of_averages.txt")